Often we have to deal with
missing values in our data.
They could look like not numbers,
empty strings, or outliers like minus 999.
Sometimes they can contain useful
information by themselves,
like what was the reason of
missing value occurring here?
How to use them effectively?
How to engineer new features from them?
We'll do the topic for this video.
So what kind of information
missing values might contain?
How can they look like?
Let's take a look at missing values
in the Springfield competition.
This is metrics of samples and features.
People mainly reviewed each feature, and
found missing values for each column.
This latest could be not a number,
empty string, minus 1, 99, and so on.
For example, how can we found out
that -1 can be the missing value?
We could draw a histogram and
see this variable has uniform
distribution between 0 and 1.
And that it has small peak of -1 values.
So if there are no not numbers there, we
can assume that they were replaced by -1.
Or the feature distribution plot
can look like the second figure.
Note that x axis has lock scale.
In this case, not a numbers probably
were few by features mean value.
You can easily generalize this
logic to apply to other cases.
Okay on this example we just learned this,
missing values can be hidden from us.
And by hidden I mean replaced by some
other value beside not a number.
Great, let's talk about
missing value importation.
The most often examples are first,
replacing not a number with some
value outside fixed value range.
Second, replacing not
a number with mean or median.
And third,
trying to reconstruct value somehow.
First method is useful
in a way that it gives
three possibility to take missing
value into separate category.
The downside of this is that performance
of linear networks can suffer.
Second method usually beneficial for
simple linear models and neural networks.
But again for trees it can be harder to
select object which had missing values
in the first place.
Let's keep the feature value
reconstruction for now, and
turn to feature generation for a moment.
The concern we just have discussed can
be addressed by adding new feature
isnull indicating which rows have
missing values for this feature.
This can solve problems with trees and
neural networks while computing mean or
median.
But the downside of this is that we will
double number of columns in the data set.
Now back to missing values
importation methods.
The third one, and
the last one we will discuss here,
is to reconstruct each value if possible.
One example of such possibility is
having missing values in time series.
For example,
we could have everyday temperature for
a month but several values in
the middle of months are missing.
Well of course, we can approximate
them using nearby observations.
But obviously, this kind of
opportunity is rarely the case.
In most typical scenario rows
of our data set are independent.
And we usually will not find any
proper logic to reconstruct them.
Great, to this moment we already learned
that we can construct new feature,
isnull indicating which
rows contains not numbers.
What are other important moments about
feature generation we should know?
Well there's one general concern about
generating new features from
one with missing values.
That is, if we do this,
we should be very careful with
replacing missing values
before our feature generation.
To illustrate this, let's imagine we have
a year long data set with two features.
Daytime feature and
temperature which had missing values.
We can see all of this on the figure.
Now we fill missing values with some
value, for example with median.
If you have data over the whole year
median probably will be near zero so
it should look like that.
Now we want to add feature like
difference between temperature today and
yesterday, let's do this.
As we can see,
near the missing values this difference
usually will be abnormally huge.
And this can be misleading our model.
But hey, we already know that we can
approximate missing values sometimes here
by interpolation the error by points,
great.
But unfortunately, we usually don't
have enough time to be so careful here.
And more importantly,
these problems can occur in cases when we
can't come up with such specific solution.
Let's review another example
of missing value importation.
Which will be substantially
discussed later
in advanced feature [INAUDIBLE] topic.
Here we have a data set
with independent rows.
And we want to encode the categorical
feature with the numeric feature.
To achieve that we calculate mean
value of numeric feature for
every category, and
replace categories with these mean values.
What happens if we fill not
the numbers in the numeric feature,
with some value outside of
feature range like -999.
As we can see, all values we will
be doing them closer to -999.
And the more the row's corresponding to
particular category will have missing
values.
The closer mean value will be to -999.
The same is true if we fill missing values
with mean or median of the feature.
This kind of missing value importation
definitely can screw up the feature we
are constructing.
The way to handle this
particular case is to simply
ignore missing values while
calculating means for each category.
Again let me repeat the idea
of these two examples.
You should be very careful with early none
importation if you want to generate new
features.
There's one more interesting
thing about missing values.
[INAUDIBLE] boost can
handle a lot of numbers and
sometimes using this approach
can change score drastically.
Besides common approaches
we have discussed,
sometimes we can treat
outliers as missing values.
For example, if we have some easy
classification task with songs which
are thought to be composed even before
ancient Rome, or maybe the year 2025.
We can try to treat these
outliers as missing values.
If you have categorical features,
sometimes it can be beneficial
to change the missing values or
categories which present in the test data
but do not present in the train data.
The intention for doing so appeals to
the fact that the model which didn't have
that category in the train data
will eventually treat it randomly.
Here and
of categorical features can be of help.
As we already discussed in our course, we
can change categories to its frequencies
and thus to it categories was in
before based on their frequency.
Let's walk through
the example on the slide.
There you see from the categorical
feature, they not appear in the train.
Let's generate new feature indicating
number of where the occurrence
is in the data.
We will name this feature
categorical_encoded.
Value A has six occurrences
in both train and test, and
that's value of new feature
related to A will be equal to 6.
The same works for values B, D, or C.
But now new features various related
to D and C are equal to each other.
And if there is some dependence in between
target and number of occurrences for
each category, our model will be
able to successfully visualize that.
To conclude this video, let´s overview
main points we have discussed.
The choice of method to fill not
a numbers depends on the situation.
Sometimes, you can
reconstruct missing values.
But usually, it is easier to
replace them with value outside of
feature range, like -999 or
to replace them with mean or median.
Also missing values already can be
replaced with something by organizers.
In this case if you want know exact
rows which have missing values
you can investigate this
by browsing histograms.
More, the model can improve its results
using binary feature isnull which
indicates what roles have missing values.
In general, avoid replacing missing
values before feature generation,
because it can decrease
usefulness of the features.
And in the end,
Xgboost can handle not a numbers directly,
which sometimes can change the score for
the better.
Using knowledge you have
derived from our discussion,
now you should be able to
identify missing values.
Describe main methods to handle them, and
apply this knowledge to gain
an edge in your next computation.
Try these methods in
different scenarios and
for sure, you will succeed.